2 
Part ONE | The conTemporary business worldThe U.S. Business 
Environment
1
What Goes Up  . . . Can Go 
Even Higher!
The sign in front of a Texas Mobil gasoline sta -
tion summed it up nicely: The “prices” for the 
three grades of gasoline sold at the station 
were l  isted as “an arm,” “a leg,” and “your 
first born.” While the sign no doubt led to a few smiles 
from  motorists, its sentiments were far from a laughing 
matter. The stark  reality is that gas prices have fluctuated 
 dramatically in  recent years, reaching an all-time high of 
over $4.00 per gallon in early 2008 before dropping back 
to less than $2.00 per gallon in 2009. By 2011, though, 
 prices were surging again, and some experts suggest -
ed that they could hit $5.00 per gallon in the near fu -
ture.  Indeed, the dramatic price fluctuations that began 
in mid-2004 have left consumers, government officials, 
and business  leaders struggling to cope with uncertainty 
about future prices.
What makes this gas crisis unusual is that it began with 
an unusual mix of supply, demand, and global forces. In 
the past, gas prices generally increased only when the  supply 
was reduced. But the circumstances underlying the increases 
that started in 2004 and continued through 2011 were much more  complex. First, 
global supplies of gasoline have been increasing at a rate that has more than 
offset the steady decline in U.S. domestic production of gasoline since 1972. As 
a result, the United States has been relying more on foreign producers and is, 
therefore, subject to whatever prices those producers want to charge.  Second, 
demand for gasoline in the United States has  continued to rise as a result of a 
After reading this chapter,  
you should be able to:
1 Define the nature of U.S. business 
and identify its main goals and 
functions.
2 Describe the external environments 
of business and discuss how these 
environments affect the success or 
failure of any organization.
3 Describe the different types of 
global economic systems according 
to the means by which they control 
the factors of production.
4 Show how markets, demand, and 
supply affect resource distribution 
in the United States, identify the 
elements of private enterprise, 
and explain the various degrees of 
competition in the U.S. economic 
system.
5 Explain the importance of the 
economic environment to business 
and identify the factors used to 
evaluate the performance of an 
economic system. The U.S. Business Environment       CHAPTER 1  3
WHaT’S in iT for M E?
The forces that have caused jumps in gas prices re -
flect both the opportunities and challenges you’ll find 
in today’s business world. All businesses are  subject 
to the influences of economic forces. But these same 
economic forces also provide astute managers and 
 entrepreneurs with opportunities for profits and 
growth. By understanding these economic forces and 
how they interact, you’ll be better able to (1) appreci -
ate how managers must contend with the challenges 
and opportunities resulting from economic forces 
from the standpoint of an employee and a manager 
or business owner, and (2) understand why prices 
fluctuate from the perspective of a consumer.
In this chapter, we’ll look at some basic elements 
of economic systems and describe the economics 
of market systems. We’ll also introduce and discuss 
several indicators that are used to gauge the vitality 
of our domestic economic system. But first, let’s start 
with some business basics.growing population, the continued popularity of 
large gas-guzzling vehicles, and a strong demand 
for other petroleum-based products.
Another major piece of the puzzle has been a 
surging global economy that until recently caused 
a higher demand for oil and gasoline. China, 
in particular, has become a major consumer of 
petroleum, passing Japan in 2005 to trail only the 
United States in total consumption. The global 
recession that started in 2008, however, reduced 
demand in most industrialized countries. The 
recession, in fact, probably played a role in the 
dip in prices in 2009 just as the gradual recovery 
that started in 2010 has helped spur higher prices 
once again. Political turmoil in the Middle East in 
2011 also played a major role.
The price fluctuations have also led to a wide array 
of related consequences. Automobile manufac -
turers stepped up their commitment to making 
more fuel-  efficient cars even as automobile sales 
Heather A. Craig/Shutterstock
MyBizLab  Where you see MyBizLab in this 
chapter, go to www.mybizlab.com  for additional 
activities on the topic being discussed.4 PART 1     THE ConTEM por Ary BUSI nESS WorLd
plummeted during the recent recession. Refiners posted record profits 
(indeed, some critics charged that the energy companies were guilty of 
price gouging). And even local police officers were kept busy combating 
a surge in gasoline theft, yet another indication that gas was becoming an 
increasingly valuable commodity!1
Our opening story continues on page 24.
The Concept of Business  
and the Concept of Profit
What do you think of when you hear the word business ? Does it conjure up images 
of successful corporations, such as Apple and Google? Or of less successful 
 companies, such as Borders Books and Kmart? Are you reminded of smaller firms, 
such as your local supermarket or favorite restaurant? Or do you think of even 
smaller family-owned operations, such as your neighborhood pizzeria or the florist 
down the street?
All these organizations are businesses —organizations that provide goods or 
 services that are then sold to earn profits. Indeed, the prospect of earning profits —
the difference between a business’s revenues and its expenses—is what encourages 
people to open and expand businesses. After all, profits are the rewards owners get 
for risking their money and time. The right to pursue profits distinguishes a business 
from those organizations—such as most universities, hospitals, and government 
agencies—that run in much the same way but that generally don’t seek profits.2
Consumer Choice and Demand  In a capitalistic system, such as that in the 
 United States, businesses exist to earn profits for owners; within certain broad 
 constraints an owner is free to set up a new business, grow that business, sell it, or 
even shut it down. But consumers also have freedom of choice. In choosing how 
to pursue profits, businesses must take into account what consumers want and/or 
need. No matter how efficient a business is, it won’t survive if there is no demand 
for its goods or services. Neither a snowblower shop in Florida nor a beach-umbrella 
store in Alaska is likely to do well.
Opportunity and Enterprise  If enterprising businesspeople can spot a promis -
ing opportunity and then develop a good plan for capitalizing on it, they can  succeed. 
For example, as large retailers like Circuit City and Linens-N-Things closed their doors 
in 2009, other firms profited by handling the inventory liquidations of those failed 
retailers. The opportunity always involves goods or services that  consumers need 
and/or want—especially if no one else is supplying them or if existing  businesses are 
doing so inefficiently or incompletely.
The Benefits of Business  So what are the benefits of businesses? Businesses 
 produce most of the goods and services we consume, and they employ most working 
people. They create most new innovations and provide a vast range of opportunities 
for new businesses, which serve as their suppliers. A healthy business climate also 
contributes to the quality of life and standard of living of people in a society. Business 
profits enhance the personal incomes of millions of owners and stockholders, and 
business taxes help to support governments at all levels. Many businesses support 
charities and provide community leadership. However, some businesses also harm 
the environment, and their decision makers sometimes resort to unacceptable prac -
tices for their own personal benefit.
In this chapter, we begin our introduction to business by examining the environ -
ment in which businesses operate. This provides a foundation for our subsequent 
discussions dealing with economic forces that play a major role in the success and 
failure of businesses everywhere.
Gain hands-on experience 
through an interactive, real-
world scenario. This chapter’s 
simulation entitled Supply 
and demand is located at 
www.mybizlab.com.MyBizLab
Define the nature of U.S. 
business and identify its 
main goals and functions. The U.S. Business Environment       CHAPTER 1  5
Profits difference between a business’s 
revenues and its expensesBusiness organization that provides goods 
or services to earn profitsThe External Environments  
of Business
All businesses, regardless of their size, location, or mission, operate within a larger 
external environment. This external environment  consists of everything outside 
an organization’s boundaries that might affect it. (Businesses also have an internal 
 environment , more commonly called corporate culture ; we discuss this in Chapter 5.) 
Not surprisingly, the external environment plays a major role in determining the 
success or failure of any organization. Managers must, therefore, have a complete 
and accurate understanding of their environment and then strive to operate and 
compete within it. Businesses can also influence their environments.
Figure 1.1 shows the major dimensions and elements of the external environ -
ment as it affects businesses today. As you can see, these include the domestic 
business  environment , the global business environment , the technological  environment , 
the political-legal environment , the sociocultural environment , and the economic 
 environment .Economic
Environment
Political-Legal
Environment
Technological
Environment
Domestic Business
EnvironmentGlobal Business
EnvironmentThe Business Or ganization
Socio-Cultural
EnvironmentFigure 1.1  Dimensions of the 
External Environment
External Environment everything outside an 
organization’s boundaries that might affect it
Describe the external 
environments of business 
and discuss how these envi -
ronments affect the success or 
 failure of any organization.6 PART 1     THE ConTEM por Ary BUSI nESS WorLd
Domestic Business Environment
The domestic business environment  refers to the environment in 
which a firm  conducts its operations and derives its revenues. In 
general, businesses seek to be close to their customers, to estab -
lish strong relationships with their suppliers, and to distinguish 
themselves from their competitors. Take Urban Outfitters, for 
example. The firm  initially located its stores near urban  college 
campuses; it now also locates stores in other, often more upscale, 
areas as well. The company also has a strong network of suppli -
ers and is itself a wholesale supplier to other retailers through its 
Free People division. And it has established a clear identity for 
itself within the domestic business environment that enables it to 
compete alongside such competitors as Aeropostale and dELiA*s.
Global Business Environment
The global business environment  refers to the international forces 
that affect a business. Factors affecting the global environment at a 
general level include international trade agreements,  international 
economic conditions, political unrest, and so forth. For example, as 
political protests spread through much of the Middle East in 2011 
oil prices began to surge and companies with operations in the 
region took emergency measures to  protect their employees. At a 
more immediate level, any given business is likely to be affected 
by international market opportunities, suppliers, cultures, competi -
tors, and currency values. For instance, Urban Outfitters currently 
has stores in several other countries, including Canada, the United 
Kingdom, and Ireland, and has plans for other international expan -
sion. But as it expands into other parts of the world, it will have 
to  contend with different languages, more diverse cultures, and so 
forth. Even now, many of its suppliers are foreign companies.
Technological Environment
The technological environment  generally includes all the ways by which firms create 
value for their constituents. Technology includes human knowledge, work meth -
ods, physical equipment, electronics and telecommunications, and various pro -
cessing systems that are used to perform business activities. For instance, Urban 
Outfitters relies on a sophisticated information system that tracks sales and inven -
tory levels in order to be highly responsive to its customers. The firm also enjoys 
considerable success with its e-commerce  websites. Urban Outfitters has developed 
a strong market presence in Japan, for example, even though it has no retail outlets 
in that country.
Political-Legal Environment
The political-legal environment  reflects the relationship between business and gov -
ernment, usually in the form of government regulation of business. It is important 
for several reasons. First, the legal system defines in part what an organization can 
and can’t do. For instance, Urban Outfitters is  subject to a variety of political and legal 
forces, including product  identification laws and local zoning requirements. Likewise, 
various government agencies regulate important areas, such as advertising practices, 
safety and health  considerations, and acceptable standards of business conduct. Pro- or 
 anti-business sentiment in government and political stability are also important consid -
erations, especially for international firms. For instance, shortly after President Obama 
took office in 2009, a number of new regulations were imposed on businesses. And the 
president himself forced the resignation of General Motors’ CEO in exchange for infus -
ing new capital into the struggling automaker.
Urban Outfitters is affected by the external environment 
in many different ways.LE robshaw/Alamy The U.S. Business Environment       CHAPTER 1  7
Economic Environment relevant conditions 
that exist in the economic system in which 
a company operates
Political-Legal Environment the relation-
ship between business and governmentTechnological Environment all the ways by 
which firms create value for their  constituentsGlobal Business Environment the interna-
tional forces that affect a businessSociocultural Environment
The sociocultural environment  includes the customs, mores, values, and demographic 
characteristics of the society in which an organization functions. Sociocultural 
 processes also determine the goods and services, as well as the standards of business 
conduct, that a society is likely to value and accept. For example, a few years ago, 
Urban Outfitters introduced a Monopoly-like game called Ghettopoly. The company 
received a lot of unfavorable publicity about the game, based on critics’ charges that 
it made light of poverty and other social problems. In response, Urban Outfitters 
pulled it from shelves and discontinued its sale.
Economic Environment
The economic environment  refers to relevant conditions that exist in the economic 
 system in which a company operates. For example, if an economy is doing well 
enough that most people have jobs, a growing company may find it necessary to pay 
higher wages and offer more benefits in order to attract workers from other compa -
nies. But if many people in an economy are looking for jobs, as was the case during 
the 2009–2010 recession, a firm may be able to pay less and offer fewer benefits.
The rest of this chapter is devoted to the economic environment; the other envi -
ronments of business are covered throughout the rest of the book.
Economic Systems
A U.S. business operates differently from a business in France or the People’s Republic 
of China, and businesses in these countries differ from those in Japan or Brazil. A key 
factor in these differences is the economic system of a firm’s home country —the nation 
in which it does most of its business. An economic system  is a nation’s system for 
 allocating its resources among its citizens, both individuals and organizations.
Factors of Production
A basic difference between economic systems is the way in which a system  manages 
its factors of production —the resources that a country’s businesses use to produce 
goods and services. Economists have long focused on four factors of production: 
labor, capital, entrepreneurs , and physical resources . In addition to these traditional 
four factors, information resources  are now included as well. Note that the concept of 
 factors of production can also be applied to the resources that an individual organi -
zation manages  to produce goods and services.
Labor  People who work for businesses provide labor. Labor , sometimes called 
 human resources , includes the physical and intellectual contributions people make 
while  engaged in economic production. Starbucks, for example, employs over 176,000 
people.3 The firm’s workforce includes the baristas who prepare coffees for customers, 
store managers, regional managers, coffee tasters, quality control experts, coffee buyers, 
marketing experts, financial specialists, and other specialized workers and managers.
Capital  Obtaining and using labor and other resources requires capital —the  financial 
resources needed to operate a business. You need capital to start a new  business and 
Economic System a nation’s system for 
 allocating its resources among its citizensLabor (Human Resources) physical and 
mental capabilities of people as they 
 contribute to economic productionSociocultural Environment the customs, mo -
res, values, and demographic  characteristics of 
the society in which an organization  functions
Capital funds needed to create and operate 
a business enterpriseFactors of Production resources used in the 
production of goods and services—  labor, 
capital, entrepreneurs, physical resources, 
and information resourcesDomestic Business Environment the 
 environment in which a firm conducts its 
 operations and derives its revenues
Describe the different types 
of global economic sys -
tems according to the means by 
which they control the factors of 
 production.8 PART 1     THE ConTEM por Ary BUSI nESS WorLd
then to keep it running and growing. For example, when Howard Schultz  decided to 
buy the fledgling Starbucks coffee outfit back in 1987, he used personal savings and a 
loan to finance his acquisition. As Starbucks grew, he came to rely more on Starbucks’ 
profits. Eventually, the firm sold stock to other investors to raise even more money. 
Starbucks continues to rely on a blend of current earnings and both short- and long-
term debt to finance its operations and fuel its growth. Moreover, even when the firm 
decided to close several hundred coffee shops in 2008 and early 2009, it employed 
capital to pay off leases and provide severance pay to employees who lost their jobs.
Entrepreneurs  An entrepreneur  is a person who accepts the risks and opportuni -
ties entailed in creating and operating a new business. Three individuals founded 
Starbucks back in 1971 and planned to emphasize wholesale distribution of fresh 
coffee beans. However, they lacked either the interest or the vision to see the  retail 
potential for coffee. But Howard Schultz was willing to accept the risks associat -
ed with retail growth and, after buying the company, he capitalized on the market 
 opportunities for rapid growth. Had his original venture failed, Schultz would have 
lost most of his savings. Most economic systems encourage entrepreneurs, both to 
start new businesses and to make the decisions that allow them to create new jobs 
and make more profits for their owners.
Physical Resources  Physical resources  are the tangible things that organizations 
use to conduct their business. They include natural resources and raw  materials, 
 offices, storage and production facilities, parts and supplies, computers and 
 peripherals, and a variety of other equipment. For example, Starbucks relies on coffee 
beans and other food products, the equipment it uses to make its coffee drinks, paper 
 products for packaging, and other retail equipment, as well as office equipment and 
storage facilities for running its business at the corporate level.
(a)Starbucks uses various factors of 
production, including (a) labor, 
such as this Starbucks barrista; 
(b) entrepreneurs, such as CEO 
Howard Schultz; and (c) physical 
resources, including coffee beans.
(c) (b)
Xinhua/ photoshot
foodfolio/AlamyUppA/photoshot The U.S. Business Environment       CHAPTER 1  9
Information Resources  The production of tangible goods once dominated most 
economic systems. Today, information resources —data and other information used 
by businesses—play a major role. Information resources that businesses rely on in -
clude market forecasts, the specialized knowledge of people, and  economic data. In 
turn, much of what they do results either in the creation of new information or the 
repackaging of existing information for new users. For example, Starbucks uses vari -
ous economic statistics to decide where to open new outlets. It also uses sophisticated 
forecasting models to predict the future prices of coffee beans. And consumer taste 
tests help the firm decide when to introduce new products.
Types of Economic Systems
Different types of economic systems manage these factors of production differently. In 
some systems, all ownership is private; in others, all factors of production are owned 
or controlled by the government. Most systems, however, fall between these extremes.
Economic systems also differ in the ways decisions are made about production 
and allocation. A planned economy  relies on a centralized government to control all 
Entrepreneur individual who accepts 
the risks and opportunities involved  
in creating and operating a new business 
venturePhysical Resources tangible items 
 organizations use in the conduct of their 
businesses
Mana GinG in T UrBUlEnT TiMES
What Goes Around  . . .
It seems like just yesterday. In 2005 the global economy was 
booming. In the United States, for example, business profits 
were soaring, jobs were plentiful, and home ownership was 
at any all-time high. The stock market reached unprecedent -
ed highs, pension plans were burgeoning, and new business 
 opportunities were plentiful.
Fast-forward just five short years to 2010, and things 
looked a lot different. Business profits were down, hundreds of 
thousands of jobs were lost and unemployment claims soared, 
and mortgage foreclosures were the order of the day. The stock 
market plummeted, pension plans went broke, and it seemed 
like no one wanted to start a new business (and even those 
who did had a hard time getting financing).
What happened in this short period of time? Economists call 
it the business cycle. Historically, our economy has  followed long 
periods of growth and prosperity, with periods of cutbacks and 
retreats. And that’s where we were in 2010. During extended pe -
riods of prosperity, people sometimes start to act as though good 
times will last forever. They continue to bid up stock prices, for 
instance, far beyond rational value. They also take on too much 
debt, save too little money, and spend beyond their means. But 
things have a way of correcting themselves, and that’s what hap -
pened when our economy went into recession beginning in 2008.
So what does the future hold? Well, while no one has a real crys -
tal ball, most experts agree that the bad times will run their course, 
and then things will start looking up again. Indeed, by  mid-2011 the stock market was inching back up and many  businesses were 
cautiously hiring again. It may take awhile  longer for growth to 
really take off again, but one day soon profits will again start to 
surge, businesses will  embark on  ambitious  hiring plans, the stock 
market will  surpass all  previous highs, and  business opportuni -
ties will again be  plentiful.  Until then, though, managers have to 
 focus on  following core  business principles and do their best to 
steer their organizations through today’s  turbulence.
Planned Economy economy that relies  
on a centralized government to control  
all or most factors of production and 
to make all or most production and 
 allocation decisionsInformation Resources data and other 
information used by businessesMyBizLabLilli day/iStockphoto.com10 PART 1     THE ConTEM por Ary BUSI nESS WorLd
or most factors of production and to make all or most production and allocation deci -
sions. In a market economy , individual producers and consumers control production 
and allocation by creating combinations of supply and demand. Let’s look at each of 
these types of economic systems as well as mixed market economies in more detail.
Planned Economies  There are two basic forms of planned economies: communism  
(discussed here) and socialism  (discussed as a mixed market economy). As envisioned 
by nineteenth-century German economist Karl Marx, communism  is a system in which 
the government owns and operates all factors of production. Under such a system, 
the government would assign people to jobs; it would also own all business and 
 control business decisions—what to make, how much to charge, and so forth. Marx 
proposed that individuals would contribute according to their abilities and  receive 
benefits  according to their needs. He also expected government ownership of produc -
tion factors to be temporary: Once society had matured, government would wither 
away, and workers would take direct ownership of the factors of production.
The former Soviet Union and many Eastern European countries embraced 
 communism until the end of the twentieth century. In the early 1990s, however, one 
country after another renounced communism as both an economic and a political 
system. Today, North Korea, Vietnam, and the People’s Republic of China are among 
the few nations with openly communist systems. Even in these countries, however, 
planned economic systems are making room for features of the free enterprise  system.
Market Economies  A market  is a mechanism for exchange between the buyers and 
sellers of a particular good or service. (Like capital , the term market  can have multiple 
meanings.) Market economies rely on capitalism and free enterprise to create an environ -
ment in which producers and consumers are free to sell and buy what they choose (within 
certain limits). As a result, items produced and prices paid are largely determined by 
supply and demand. The underlying premise of a market economy is to create shared val -
ue—in theory, at least, effective businesses benefit because they earn profits on what they 
sell while customers also benefit by getting what they want for the best price available.4
To understand how a market economy works, consider what happens when you 
go to a fruit market to buy apples. While one vendor is selling apples for $1 per 
pound, another is charging $1.50. Both vendors are free to charge what they want, 
and you are free to buy what you choose. If both vendors’ apples are of the same 
quality, you will buy the cheaper ones. If the $1.50 apples are fresher, you may buy 
them instead. In short, both buyers and sellers enjoy freedom of choice.
Taken to a more general level of discussion, individuals in a market system are free 
to not only buy what they want but also to work where they want and to invest, save, 
or spend their money in whatever manner they choose. Likewise, businesses are free 
to decide what products to make, where to sell them, and what prices to charge. This 
process contrasts markedly with that of a planned economy, in which individuals may 
be told where they can and cannot work, companies may be told what they can and 
cannot make, and consumers may have little or no choice in what they purchase or 
how much they pay. The political basis of market processes is called capitalism , which 
allows the private ownership of the factors of production and encourages entrepre -
neurship by offering profits as an incentive. The economic basis of market processes is 
the operation of demand and supply, which we discuss in the next section.
Mixed Market Economies  In reality, there are really no “pure” planned or “pure” 
market economies. Most countries rely on some form of mixed market economy  that 
 features characteristics of both planned and market economies. Even a  market economy 
that strives to be as free and open as possible, such as the U.S. economy, restricts certain 
activities. Some products can’t be sold legally, others can be sold only to people of a cer -
tain age, advertising must be truthful, and so forth. And the People’s Republic of China, 
the world’s most important planned economy, is increasingly allowing certain forms of 
private ownership and entrepreneurship (although with government oversight).
When a government is making a change from a planned economy to a market econ -
omy, it usually begins to adopt market mechanisms through privatization —the process 
of converting government enterprises into privately owned companies. In Poland,  The U.S. Business Environment       CHAPTER 1  11
Capitalism system that sanctions the 
 private ownership of the factors of 
 production and encourages entrepreneurship 
by offering profits as an incentive
Market mechanism for exchange between buy -
ers and sellers of a particular good or serviceCommunism political system in which the 
gover  nment owns and operates all factors  
of productionfor example, the national airline was sold to a group of private 
 investors. In recent years, this practice has spread to many other 
 countries as well. For example, the postal system in many coun -
tries is government-owned and government-managed. The 
Netherlands, however, recently privatized its TNT Post Group 
N.V., already among the world’s most efficient post-office oper -
ations. Canada has also privatized its air traffic control system. 
In each case, the new enterprise reduced its payroll, boosted 
efficiency and productivity, and quickly became profitable.
In the partially planned system called socialism , the 
 government owns and operates selected major industries. In 
such mixed market economies, the government may control 
banking, transportation, or industries producing such basic 
goods as oil and steel. Smaller businesses, such as clothing stores 
and restaurants, are privately owned. Many Western European 
countries, including England and France, allow free market 
operations in most economic areas but keep government control 
of others, such as health care. And when the U.S. government 
took an ownership stake in General Motors and Chrysler as part 
of the recession-driven bail out in 2009 many critics of President 
Obama called the decision an act of socialism.
The Economics 
of Market Systems
Understanding the complex nature of the U.S. economic  system 
is essential to understanding the environment in which U.S. 
businesses operate. In this section, we describe the  workings of 
the U.S. market economy. Specifically, we examine the nature 
of demand and supply , private enterprise , and degrees of competition . 
We will then discuss private enterprise and forms of competition.
Demand and Supply in a Market Economy
A market economy consists of many different markets that function within that 
 economy. As a consumer, for instance, the choices you have and the prices you 
pay for gas, food, clothing, and entertainment are all governed by different sets of 
 market forces. Businesses also have many different choices about buying and selling 
their products. Dell Computer, for instance, can purchase keyboards from literally 
hundreds of different manufacturers. Its managers also have to decide what inven -
tory levels should be, at what prices they should sell their goods, and how they will 
distribute these goods. Literally billions of exchanges take place every day between 
businesses and individuals; between businesses; and among individuals, businesses, 
and governments. Moreover, exchanges conducted in one area often affect exchanges 
elsewhere. For instance, the high cost of gas may also lead to prices going up for 
other products, ranging from food to clothing to delivery services. Why? Because 
each of these businesses relies heavily on gas to transport products.
Mixed Market Economy economic system 
featuring characteristics of both planned 
and market economies
Many formerly planned economies have moved toward a 
more mixed economic model.
Privatization process of converting 
 government enterprises into privately  
owned companies
Socialism planned economic system in 
which the government owns and operates 
only selected major sources of productionMarket Economy economy in which 
 individuals control production and  allocation 
decisions through supply and demand
Geoff A Howard/Alamy
Show how markets, 
demand, and supply 
affect resource distribution in 
the United States, identify the 
 elements of private enterprise, 
and explain the various degrees 
of competition in the U.S. eco -
nomic system.12 PART 1     THE ConTEM por Ary BUSI nESS WorLd
The Laws of Demand and Supply  On all economic levels, decisions about 
what to buy and what to sell are determined primarily by the forces of demand and 
 supply.5 Demand  is the willingness and ability of buyers to purchase a product (a 
good or a service). Supply  is the willingness and ability of producers to offer a good 
or service for sale. Generally speaking, demand and supply follow basic laws:
• The law of demand : Buyers will purchase (demand) more  of a product as its price 
drops  and less of a product as its price increases .
• The law of supply : Producers will offer (supply) more  of a product for sale as its 
price rises and less of a product as its price drops .
The Demand and Supply Schedule  To appreciate these laws in action, consider the 
market for pizza in your town (or neighborhood). If everyone is willing to pay $25 for 
a pizza (a relatively high price), the town’s only pizzeria will produce a large supply. 
But if everyone is willing to pay only $5 (a relatively low price), it will make fewer 
pizzas. Through careful analysis, we can determine how many pizzas will be sold 
at different prices. These results, called a demand and supply schedule , are obtained 
from marketing research, historical data, and other studies of the market. Properly 
applied, they reveal the relationships among different levels of demand and supply 
at different price levels.
Demand and Supply Curves  The demand and supply schedule can be used to 
 construct demand and supply curves for pizza in your town. A demand curve  shows 
how many products—in this case, pizzas—will be demanded (bought) at different 
prices. A supply curve  shows how many pizzas will be supplied (baked or offered for 
sale) at different prices.
Figure 1.2 shows demand and supply curves for pizzas. As you can see, demand 
increases as price decreases; supply increases as price increases. When demand and 
supply curves are plotted on the same graph, the point at which they intersect is 
the market price  (also called the equilibrium price )—the price at which the quantity 
of goods demanded and the quantity of goods supplied are equal. In Figure 1.2, 
the equilibrium price for pizzas in our example is $10. At this point, the quantity 
of  pizzas demanded and the quantity of pizzas supplied are the same: 1,000 pizzas 
per week.
Surpluses and Shortages  What if the pizzeria decides to make some other number 
of pizzas? For example, what would happen if the owner tried to increase profits by 
making more  pizzas to sell? Or what if the owner wanted to lower overhead, cut back 
on store hours, and reduce  the number of pizzas offered for sale? In either case, the 
result would be an inefficient use of resources and lower profits. For instance, if the 
pizzeria supplies 1,200 pizzas and tries to sell them for $10 each, 200 pizzas will not 
be bought. Our demand schedule shows that only 1,000 pizzas will be demanded at 
this price. The pizzeria will therefore have a surplus —a situation in which the quan -
tity supplied exceeds the quantity demanded. It will lose the money that it spent 
making those extra 200 pizzas.
Conversely, if the pizzeria supplies only 800 pizzas, a shortage  will result. The 
quantity demanded will be greater than the quantity supplied. The pizzeria will 
“lose” the extra profit that it could have made by producing 200 more pizzas. Even 
though consumers may pay more for pizzas because of the shortage, the pizzeria 
will still earn lower total profits than if it had made 1,000 pizzas. It will also risk 
angering customers who cannot buy pizzas and encourage other entrepreneurs to 
set up competing pizzerias to satisfy unmet demand. Businesses should seek the 
ideal  combination of price charged and quantity supplied so as to maximize profits, 
 maintain goodwill among customers, and discourage competition. This ideal combi -
nation is found at the equilibrium point. 
Our example involves only one company, one product, and a few buyers. The 
U.S. economy—indeed, any market economy—is far more complex. Thousands of 
companies sell hundreds of thousands of products to millions of buyers every day. 
In the end, however, the result is much the same: Companies try to supply the quan -
tity and selection of goods that will earn them the largest profits. The U.S. Business Environment       CHAPTER 1  13
Law of Demand principle that buyers will 
purchase (demand) more of a product as its 
price drops and less as its price increasesSupply the willingness and ability of pro-
ducers to offer a good or service for saleDemand the willingness and ability of buy-
ers to purchase a good or service
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
1600
1700
1800
1900
2000
Quantity of Pizzas DemandedDEMAND AND SUPPL Y SCHEDULES
Price
$2
$4
$6
$8
$10
$12
$14
$16
$18
$20Quantity of
Pizzas Demanded
2000
1900
1600
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
100Quantity of
Pizzas Supplied
100
400
600
800
1000
1200
1300
1600
1800
2000Demand Cur veWhen the price of pizza
is high, fewer people are
willing to pay for it. But
when the price goes
down, more people are
willing to buy pizza. At
the lower price, in
other words, more
people “demand”
the product.100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
1600
1700
1800
1900
2000$
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1Price of Pizzas$
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1Price of Pizzas
Quantity of Pizzas SuppliedSupply Cur ve$
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1Price of Pizzas
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
1600
1700
1800
1900
2000
Quantity of PizzasSupply
Curve
Demand
CurveProfit-Maximizing
QuantityEQUILIBRIUM PRICE
(DEMAND AND SUPPL Y)When the price of pizza is low, 
more people are willing to buy 
pizza. Pizza makers, however, do 
not have the money to invest in 
making pizzas and so they make 
fewer. Supply, therefore, is 
limited, and only when the 
price goes up will pizza 
makers be willing and 
able to increase supply .When the pizza makers increase 
supply in order to satisfy demand, 
there will be a point at which the 
price that suppliers can charge 
is the same as the price that a 
maximum number of customers 
is willing to pay .  That point is the 
market price, or equilibrium  price.
Law of Supply principle that producers will 
offer (supply) more of a product for sale as 
its price rises and less as its price dropsDemand and Supply Schedule assessment of 
the relationships among different  
levels of demand and supply at different price 
levels
Demand Curve graph showing how many 
units of a product will be demanded 
(bought) at different prices
Supply Curve graph showing how many 
units of a product will be supplied (offered 
for sale) at different pricesMarket Price (Equilibrium Price)  
profit-maximizing price at which the 
 quantity of goods demanded and the 
 quantity of goods supplied are equal
Surplus situation in which quantity  
 supplied exceeds quantity demanded
Shortage situation in which quantity 
 demanded exceeds quantity suppliedFigure 1.2  Demand and Supply
Source:  Adapted from Karl E. Case and 
Ray C. Fair, Principles of Economics , 8th 
ed., updated (Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 2007).14 PART 1     THE ConTEM por Ary BUSI nESS WorLd
Private Enterprise and Competition  
in a Market Economy
Market economies rely on a private enterprise  system—one that allows individuals 
to pursue their own interests with minimal government restriction. In turn, private 
enterprise requires the presence of four elements: private property rights, freedom of 
choice, profits, and competition.
1 Private property rights.  ownership of the resources used to create wealth is in 
the hands of individuals.
2 Freedom of choice.  You can sell your labor to any employer you choose. You 
can also choose which products to buy, and producers can usually choose 
whom to hire and what to produce.
3 Profits.  The lure of profits (and freedom) leads some people to abandon the 
 security of working for someone else and to assume the risks of entrepreneur -
ship. Anticipated profits also influence individuals’ choices of which goods or 
services to produce.
4 Competition.  If profits motivate individuals to start businesses, competition 
motivates them to operate those businesses efficiently. Competition  occurs 
when two or more businesses vie for the same resources or customers. To gain 
an advantage over competitors, a business must produce its goods or services 
efficiently and be able to sell at a reasonable profit. To achieve these goals, it 
must convince customers that its products are either better or less expensive 
than those of its competitors. Competition, therefore, forces all businesses to 
make products better or cheaper. A company that produces inferior, expensive 
products is likely to fail.
Degrees of Competition  Even in a free enterprise system, not all industries 
are equally competitive. Economists have identified four degrees of competition in 
a  private enterprise system: perfect competition, monopolistic competition, oligopoly , and 
monopoly . Note that these are not always truly distinct categories but actually tend 
to fall along a continuum; perfect competition and monopoly anchor the ends of the 
continuum, with monopolistic competition and oligopoly falling in between. Table 1.1 
summarizes the features of these four degrees of competition.
Perfect Competition  For perfect competition  to exist, two conditions must prevail: 
(1) all firms in an industry must be small, and (2) the number of firms in the industry 
must be large. Under these conditions, no single firm is powerful enough to influence 
the price of its product. Prices are, therefore, determined by such market forces as 
supply and demand.
TaBlE 1.1 Degrees of Competition
CharacteristicPerfect 
CompetitionMonopolistic 
Competition Oligopoly Monopoly
Example Local farmer Stationery store Steel industry Public utility
Number of competitors ManyMany, but fewer 
than in perfect 
competitionFew None
Ease of entry into 
industryRelatively easy Fairly easy DifficultRegulated by 
government
Similarity of goods 
or services offered by 
competing firmsIdentical SimilarCan be similar 
or differentNo directly 
competing goods 
or services
Level of control over 
price by individual firmsNone Some Some Considerable The U.S. Business Environment       CHAPTER 1  15
Oligopoly market or industry characterized 
by a handful of (generally large) sellers with 
the power to influence the prices of their 
products
Perfect Competition market or industry 
characterized by numerous small firms 
 producing an identical productCompetition vying among businesses for 
the same resources or customersPrivate Enterprise economic system that 
allows individuals to pursue their own inter-
ests without undue governmental restrictionIn addition, these two conditions also reflect four principles:
1 The products of each firm are so similar that buyers view them as identical to 
those of other firms.
2 Both buyers and sellers know the prices that others are paying and receiving 
in the marketplace.
3 Because each firm is small, it is easy for firms to enter or leave the market.
4 Going prices are set exclusively by supply and demand and accepted by both 
sellers and buyers.
U.S. agriculture is a good example of perfect competition. The wheat produced on 
one farm is the same as that from another. Both producers and buyers are aware of 
prevailing market prices. It is relatively easy to start producing wheat and relatively 
easy to stop when it’s no longer profitable.
Monopolistic Competition  In monopolistic competition , there are numerous sellers 
trying to make their products at least seem to be different from those of competitors. 
While there are many sellers involved in monopolistic competition, there tend to 
be fewer than in pure competition. Differentiating strategies include brand names 
(Tide versus Cheer), design or styling (Diesel versus Lucky jeans), and advertising 
(Coke versus Pepsi). For example, in an effort to attract health-conscious consumers, 
Kraft Foods promotes such differentiated products as low-fat Cool Whip, low-calorie 
Jell-O, and sugar-free Kool-Aid.
Monopolistically competitive businesses may be large or small, but they can still 
enter or leave the market easily. For example, many small clothing stores  compete 
successfully with large apparel retailers, such as Abercrombie & Fitch, Banana 
Republic, and J. Crew. A good case in point is bebe stores. The small clothing chain 
controls its own manufacturing facilities and can respond just as quickly as firms 
like the Gap to changes in fashion tastes. Likewise, many single-store clothing busi -
nesses in college towns compete by developing their own T-shirt and cap designs 
with copyrighted slogans and logos.
Product differentiation also gives sellers some control over prices. For instance, 
even though Target shirts may have similar styling and other features, Ralph Lauren 
Polo shirts can be priced with little regard for lower Target prices. But the large 
number of buyers relative to sellers applies potential limits to prices: Although Polo 
might be able to sell shirts for $20 more than a comparable Target shirt, it could not 
sell as many shirts if they were priced at $200 more.
Oligopoly  When an industry has only a handful of sellers, an oligopoly  exists. As 
a general rule, these sellers are quite large. The entry of new competitors is hard 
because large capital investment is needed. Thus, oligopolistic industries (the auto -
mobile, airline, and steel industries) tend to stay that way. Only two companies 
make large commercial aircraft: Boeing (a U.S. company) and Airbus (a European 
consortium). Furthermore, as the trend toward globalization continues, most experts 
believe that oligopolies will become increasingly prevalent.
Oligopolists have more control over their strategies than do monopolistically 
competitive firms, but the actions of one firm can significantly affect the sales of 
every other firm in the industry. For example, when one firm cuts prices or offers 
incentives to increase sales, the others usually protect sales by doing the same. 
Monopolistic Competition market or 
industry characterized by numerous buyers 
and relatively numerous sellers trying to 
differentiate their products from those of 
competitors16 PART 1     THE ConTEM por Ary BUSI nESS WorLd
Likewise, when one firm raises prices, others generally follow suit. Therefore, the 
prices of comparable products are usually similar. When an airline announces new 
fare  discounts, others adopt the same strategy almost immediately. Just as quickly, 
when discounts end for one airline, they usually end for everyone else.
Monopoly  A monopoly  exists when an industry or market has only one producer (or 
else is so dominated by one producer that other firms cannot compete with it). A sole 
supplier enjoys complete control over the prices of its products. Its only constraint is 
a decrease in consumer demand due to increased prices. In the United States, laws, 
such as the Sherman Antitrust Act (1890) and the Clayton Act (1914), forbid many 
monopolies and regulate prices charged by natural monopolies —industries in which 
one company can most efficiently supply all needed goods or services.3 Many elec -
tric companies are natural monopolies because they can supply all the power needed 
in a local area. Duplicate facilities—such as two power plants and two sets of power 
lines—would be wasteful.
Economic indicators
Because economic forces are so volatile and can be affected by so many things, the 
performance of a country’s economic system varies over time. Sometimes it gains 
strength and brings new prosperity to its members (this describes the U.S.  economy 
during the early years of the 21st century); other times it weakens and damages 
their fortunes (as was the case during 2009–2010). Clearly, then, knowing how 
an economy is performing is useful for both business owners and investors alike. 
EnTrEPrEnEUrSHiP anD nEW  VEnTUrES
Business  . . . and Pleasure
Americans are multitaskers. We sip lattes while driving, we walk 
the dog while checking stock quotes, and we pay our bills  online 
while watching TV; it is no surprise that this trend has taken on 
bigger dimensions. In many sectors business and entertainment 
are no longer considered two separate entities.  Entertainment 
used to be defined as amusement parks, miniature golf, baseball 
games, and movies. Business was business: work, dine, shop, 
etc. But now, in a recessionary market economy, industries feel 
even more pressure to mix business with entertainment. The 
brightly colored play structures in McDonald’s and the first mall 
roller coaster paved the way for this upsurge of integration that 
is now almost impossible to avoid.
Apple and Starbucks recently announced a partnership that 
allows customers to preview Apple iTunes songs while waiting in 
line for their coffee. The customers also have the option to buy 
or download music onto their iPod touch, iPhone, PC, or Mac. 
JetBlue is partnering with XM Radio to offer passengers a sample 
of the new wave of satellite radio, and United  offers DirecTV sat -
ellite television viewing on some of its flights.  Select Wal-Mart 
stores host live broadcasts of concerts enticing shoppers to lin -
ger just a little longer. This growing trend is not likely to change 
anytime soon. But businesses should be wary of new business cycles created in the entertainment realm. Entertainment-  driven 
corporations are always at a high risk of deflation when the 
economy falters. Those businesses that rely on partnerships with 
these high-risk firms may not be as grounded as they seem.
MyBizLab
Ian Shaw/Alamy
Explain the importance 
of the economic environ -
ment to business and identify 
the  factors used to evaluate the 
performance of an economic 
system. The U.S. Business Environment       CHAPTER 1  17
Business Cycle short-term pattern of 
 economic expansions and contractions
Economic Indicator a statistic that helps 
assess the performance of an economyNatural Monopoly industry in which one 
company can most efficiently supply all 
needed goods or servicesMonopoly market or industry in which there 
is only one producer that can therefore set 
the prices of its productsMost experts look to various economic indicators —statistics that show whether an 
 economic  system is strengthening, weakening, or remaining stable—to help assess 
the performance of an economy.
Economic Growth, Aggregate Output,  
and Standard of Living
At one time, about half the U.S. population was involved in producing the food 
that we needed. Today, less than 2.5 percent of the U.S. population works in 
 agriculture, and this number is expected to decrease slightly over the next decade.6 
But  agricultural efficiency has improved because better ways of producing products 
have been devised, and better technology has been invented for getting the job done. 
We can say that agricultural productivity has increased because we have been able to 
increase total output in the agricultural sector.
We can apply the same concepts to a nation’s economic system, although the 
computations are more complex. Fundamentally, how do we know whether an 
 economic system is growing or not? Experts call the pattern of short-term ups and 
downs (or, better, expansions and contractions) in an economy the business cycle . 
The primary measure of growth in the business cycle is aggregate output —the total 
quantity of goods and services produced by an economic system during a given 
period.7
To put it simply, an increase in aggregate output is growth (or economic growth). 
When output grows more quickly than the population, two things usually follow:
• Output per capita—the quantity of goods and services per person—goes up.
• The system provides more of the goods and services that people want.
When these two things occur, people living in an economic system benefit from a 
higher standard of living , which refers to the total quantity and quality of goods and 
services that they can purchase with the currency used in their economic system. To 
know how much your standard of living is improving, you need to know how much 
your nation’s economic system is growing (see Table 1.2). For instance, while the U.S. 
economy reflects overall growth in most years, in 2009 the economy actually shrank 
by 2.6 percent due to the recession.
Gross Domestic Product  Gross domestic product (GDP)  refers to the total value 
of all goods and services produced within a given period by a national economy 
through domestic factors of production. GDP is a measure of aggregate output. 
 Generally speaking, if GDP is going up, aggregate output is going up; if aggregate 
output is going up, the nation is experiencing economic growth .
Aggregate Output the total quantity of 
goods and services produced by an econom-
ic system during a given period
Standard of Living the total quantity and 
quality of goods and services people can TaBlE 1.2 U.S. GDP and GDP per Capita
2009 Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP)  
($ Trillion)2009 GDP: Real  
Growth Rate (%)2009 GDP per  
Capita: Purchasing 
Power Parity
$14.14 –2.6% $46,000
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) total value 
of all goods and services produced within a 
given period by a national economy through 
domestic factors of productionpurchase with the currency used in their 
economic system18 PART 1     THE ConTEM por Ary BUSI nESS WorLd
Sometimes, economists also use the term gross national product (GNP) , which 
refers to the total value of all goods and services produced by a national economy 
within a given period regardless of where the factors of production are located. 
What, precisely, is the difference between GDP and GNP? Consider a General 
Motors automobile plant in Brazil. The profits earned by the factory are included 
in U.S. GNP—but not in GDP—because its output is not produced domestically 
(that is, in the United States). Conversely, those profits are included in Brazil’s 
GDP—but not GNP—because they are produced domestically (that is, in Brazil). 
Calculations quickly become complex because of different factors of production. 
The labor, for example, will be mostly Brazilian but the capital mostly American. 
Thus, wages paid to Brazilian workers are part of Brazil’s GNP even though  profits 
are not.
Real Growth Rate  GDP and GNP usually differ by less than 1 percent, but 
 economists argue that GDP is a more accurate indicator of domestic economic 
 performance because it focuses only on domestic factors of production. With that in 
mind, let’s look at the middle column in Table 1.2. Here we find that the real growth 
rate of U.S. GDP—the growth rate of GDP adjusted for inflation and changes in the value 
of the  country’s currency —was –2.6 percent in 2009. This is in contrast to growth of  
2.20 percent in 2007 and 1.4 percent in 2008 (as the recession was taking hold). But 
what do these numbers actually mean? Remember that growth depends on output 
increasing at a faster rate than population . The U.S. population is growing at a rate of 
0.97 percent per year.8 The real growth rate  of the U.S. economic system, therefore, has 
for the past few years been only modest.
GDP per Capita  The number in the third column of Table 1.2 is a reflection of the 
standard of living: GDP per capita  means GDP per person. We get this figure by 
dividing total GDP ($14.14 trillion) by total population, which happens to be a bit 
over about 301 million.9 In a given period (usually calculated on an annual basis), the 
United States produces goods and services equal in value to $46,000 for every person 
in the country. Figure 1.3 shows both GDP and GDP per capita in the United States 
between 1950 and 2009. GDP per capita is a better measure than GDP itself of the 
economic well-being of the average person.
Real GDP  Real GDP  means that GDP has been adjusted to account for changes in 
currency values and price changes. To understand why adjustments are necessary, 
assume that pizza is the only product in a hypothetical economy. In 2010, a pizza 
cost $10; in 2011, a pizza cost $11. In both years, exactly 1,000 pizzas were produced. 
In 2010, the local GDP was $10,000 ($10 × 1,000); in 2011, the local GDP was $11,000 
($11 × 1,000). Has the economy grown? No. Because 1,000 pizzas were produced in 
both years, aggregate output  remained the same. The point is to not be misled into 
believing that an economy is doing better than it is. If it is not adjusted, local GDP 
for 2011 is nominal GDP —GDP measured in current dollars or with all components 
valued at current prices.10
Purchasing Power Parity  In the example, current prices  would be 2011 prices. On the 
other hand, we calculate real GDP when we adjust GDP to account for changes in 
currency values and price changes . When we make this adjustment, we account for both 
GDP and purchasing power parity —the principle that exchange rates are set so that 
the prices of similar products in different countries are about the same. Purchasing 
power parity gives us a much better idea of what people can actually buy with the finan -
cial resources allocated to them by their respective economic systems . In other words, it 
gives us a better sense of standards of living across the globe. Figure 1.4 illustrates 
a popular approach to see how purchasing power parity works in relation to a Big 
Mac. For instance, the figure pegs the price of a Big Mac in the United States at $3.73. 
Based on currency exchange rates, a Big Mac would cost $7.20 in Norway and $4.91 
in Brazil. But the same burger would cost only $1.90 in Hong Kong and $1.78 in 
Argentina. The U.S. Business Environment       CHAPTER 1  19
Productivity a measure of economic growth 
that compares how much a system produces 
with the resources needed to produce itNominal GDP gross domestic product (GDP) 
measured in current dollars or with all 
 components valued at current prices
Real GDP gross domestic product (GDP) 
adjusted to account for changes in currency 
values and price changesGross National Product (GNP) total value 
of all goods and services produced by a 
national economy within a given period 
regardless of where the factors of production 
are locatedProductivity  A major factor in the growth of an economic system is productivity , 
which is a measure of economic growth that compares how much a system produces 
with the resources needed to produce it. Let’s say that it takes 1 U.S. worker and 
1 U.S. dollar to make 10 soccer balls in an 8-hour workday. Let’s also say that it takes 
1.2 Saudi workers and the equivalent of 1.2 riyals, the currency of Saudi Arabia, to 
make 10 soccer balls in the same 8-hour workday. We can say that the U.S. soccer-ball 
industry is more productive than the Saudi soccer-ball industry. The two factors of 
production in this extremely simple case are labor and capital.
If more products are being produced with fewer factors of production, the prices 
of these products will likely go down. As a consumer, therefore, you would need 
less of your currency to purchase the same quantity of these products. In short, your 
standard of living—at least with regard to these products—has improved. If your 
entire economic system increases its productivity, then your overall standard of  living 
improves. In fact, standard of living improves only through increases in productivity .11 Real 
growth in GDP reflects growth in productivity.
1950
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2008
2009200715000
13000
12000
11000
10000
9000
8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
055000
50000
45000
40000
35000
30000
25000
20000
15000
10000
0GDP (in billions)GDP and GDP per Capita
GDP per Capita
GDP (in billions)
GDP per Capita
Note: This graph is shown in five-year increments until the year 2000, after which 
it is shown in one-year increments so as to provide more detail for recent periods.  
Hence, the curve artificially ”flattens“ after 2000.14000
GDP, or gross domestic product,  refers to 
the total value of all goods and services 
produced within a given period by a 
national economy through domestic 
factors of production. GDP per 
capita  means ”GDP per person“ 
and is a better measure of the 
economic well-being of the 
average person. The current 
difference between GDP 
and GDP per capita 
reflects an increase in 
the rate of population 
growth, particularly 
from 1947 to 
1966.
Figure 1.3  GDP and GDP per Capita
Source:  Data obtained from U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis, www.bea.gov/bea/dn/
gdplev.xls ; U.S. Census Bureau, www.census.gov/popest/states/tables/NST-EST2005–01.xls ; www.census.gov/
popest/archives/1990s; National Economic Accounts, at http://www.bea.gov/national/nipaweb/TableView.
asp#Mid ; From World Bank Development Indicators 2007–Feb 2008: International Comparison Program (May 29, 
2008), at http://www.finfacts.com/biz10/globalworldincomepercapita.htm.
Purchasing Power Parity the principle that 
exchange rates are set so that the prices of 
similar products in different countries are 
about the same20 PART 1     THE ConTEM por Ary BUSI nESS WorLd
Productivity in the United States is generally increasing, and as a result, so are GDP 
and GDP per capita in most years (excluding the 2009–2010 recession). Ultimately, 
increases in these measures of growth mean an improvement in the standard of liv -
ing. However, things don’t always proceed so smoothly. Several factors can inhibit 
the growth of an economic system, including balance of trade  and the national debt .
Balance of Trade  A country’s balance of trade  is the economic value of all the prod -
ucts that it exports minus the economic value of its imported products. The principle 
here is quite simple:
• A positive  balance of trade results when a country exports (sells to other countries) 
more than it imports (buys from other countries).
• A negative  balance of trade results when a country imports more than it exports.
A negative balance of trade is commonly called a trade deficit . In 2008, the U.S. 
trade deficit was almost $400 billion. The United States is a debtor nation  rather SwitzerlandNorway
Brasil
BritainEuro area
Canada
Turkey
Australia
JapanUnited States
Hungary
Singapore
South Korea
Poland
ThailandIndonesia
Mexico
South Africa
Taiwan
Russia
Philippines
ArgentinaMalaysia
Hong Kong604020–0+20406080100Under (–)/over (+)
valuation against the dollar, %
2.602.823.083.333.483.673.73†3.843.894.33*4.916.197.20
4.00
2.51
2.50
2.45
2.34
2.192.33
2.19
2.17
1.95
1.90
1.75
Note: *At market exchange rate (July 21st)
† Weighted average of member countries
‡ Average of four citiesChina
Big Mac
Price*, $Figure 1.4  The Big Mac Index
Source:  Data obtained from Big Mac 
Index Review 2007 (May 29, 2008), at 
http://www.woopidoo.com/reviews/
news/big-mac-index.htm The U.S. Business Environment       CHAPTER 1  21
Stability condition in which the amount  
of money available in an economic system 
and the quantity of goods and services 
produced in it are growing at about the 
same rateNational Debt the amount of money the 
government owes its creditorsFigure 1.5  Balance of Trade
Source:  Data obtained from U.S. Census 
Bureau (June 19, 2008), at http://www.
census.gov/foreign-trade/balance/
c0004.html#2005 .
Balance of Trade the economic value of all 
the products that a country exports minus the 
economic value of all the products it importsthan a creditor nation . Recent trends in the U.S. balance of trade are shown in 
Figure 1.5.
Trade deficit affects economic growth because the amount of money spent on 
foreign products has not been paid in full. Therefore, it is, in effect, borrowed money, 
and borrowed money costs more in the form of interest. The money that flows out 
of the country to pay off the deficit can’t be used to invest in productive enterprises, 
either at home or overseas.
National Debt  Its national debt  is the amount of money that the government owes 
its creditors. As of this writing, the U.S. national debt is over $13.6 trillion. You can 
find out the national debt on any given day by going to any one of several Internet 
sources, including the U.S. National Debt Clock at www.brillig.com/debt_clock.
How does the national debt affect economic growth? While taxes are the most 
obvious way the government raises money, it also sells bonds —securities through 
which it promises to pay buyers certain amounts of money by specified future dates. 
(In a sense, a bond is an IOU with interest.)12 These bonds are attractive investments 
because they are extremely safe: The U.S. government is not going to default on them 
(that is, fail to make payments when due). Even so, they must also offer a decent 
return on the buyer’s investment, and they do this by paying interest at a competi -
tive rate. By selling bonds, therefore, the U.S. government competes with every other 
potential borrower for the available supply of loanable money. The more money 
the government borrows, the less money is available for the private borrowing and 
investment that increase productivity.
Economic Stability
Stability  is a condition in which the amount of money available in an economic 
 system and the quantity of goods and services produced in it are growing at about 
the same rate. A chief goal of an economic system, stability can be threatened by 
certain factors.
Inflation  Inflation  occurs when an economic system experiences widespread 
price increases. Instability results when the amount of money injected into an 1990 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 20090
–100000
–200000
–300000
–400000
–500000
–600000
–700000
–800000
–900000U.S. Doll ars in M illionsBALANCE OF TRAD E
Inflation occurs when widespread price 
increases occur throughout an economic 
system22 PART 1     THE ConTEM por Ary BUSI nESS WorLd
economy exceeds the increase in actual output, so people have more money to 
spend but the same quantity of products available to buy. As supply and demand 
principles tell us, as people compete with one another to buy available products, 
prices go up. These high prices will eventually bring the amount of money in the 
economy back down. However, these processes are imperfect—the additional 
money will not be distributed proportionately to all people, and price increases 
often continue beyond what is really necessary. As a result, purchasing power for 
many people declines.
Keeping in mind that our definition of inflation is the occurrence of widespread 
price increases throughout an economic system, it stands to reason that we can 
 measure inflation by measuring price increases. Price indexes such as the consumer 
price index (CPI)  measure the prices of typical products purchased by consumers 
 living in urban areas.13 The CPI is expressed as a percentage of prices as compared to 
a base period. The current base period used to measure inflation is 1982–1984, which 
is set at 100 (indicating a percentage). For comparison purposes, the CPI index was 
172.2 in 2000, 195.3 in 2005, and 214.2 in 2010. So, prices in 2010 were slightly more 
than double the level in the 1982–1984 base period.
While we tend to view inflation as bad, however, in most ways it is better than 
deflation , which happens when there are widespread price cuts. While inflation 
 creates instability, it also generally indicates the overall economy is growing (just in 
an erratic manner). But deflation generally means the overall economy is shrinking, 
a more serious problem by most measures.
Unemployment  Finally, we need to consider the effect of unemployment on 
 economic stability. Unemployment  is the level of joblessness among people  actively 
seeking work in an economic system. When unemployment is low, there is a  shortage 
of labor available for businesses to hire. As businesses compete with one another for the 
available supply of labor, they raise the wages they are willing to pay. Then,  because 
higher labor costs eat into profit margins, they raise the prices of their  products. 
 Although consumers have more money to inject into the economy, this increase is 
soon undone by higher prices, so purchasing power declines.
There are at least two related problems:
• If wage rates get too high, businesses will respond by hiring fewer workers and 
unemployment will go up.
• Businesses could raise prices to counter increased labor costs, but they won’t be 
able to sell as many of their products at higher prices. Because of reduced sales, 
they will cut back on hiring and, once again, unemployment will go up.
What if the government tries to correct this situation by injecting more money 
into the economic system—say by cutting taxes or spending more money? Prices 
in  general may go up because of increased consumer demand. Again, purchasing 
power declines and inflation may set in.14 During the recession of 2008–2009 millions 
of workers lost their jobs as businesses like Circuit City closed their doors and others, 
such as General Motors and Kodak, cut thousands of jobs in an effort to stem losses. 
Indeed, in early 2010 unemployment in the United States reached a 25-year high of 
10.2 percent. By January 2011, as the economy was gradually pulling out of recession 
unemployment had dropped to around 9.5 percent.
Recessions and Depressions  Unemployment is sometimes a symptom of a system-
wide disorder in the economy. During a downturn in the business cycle, people in 
different sectors may lose their jobs at the same time. As a result, overall income 
and spending may drop. Feeling the pinch of reduced revenues, businesses may cut 
spending on the factors of production—including labor. Yet more people will be 
put out of work, and unemployment will only increase further. Unemployment that 
results from this vicious cycle is called cyclical unemployment.
If we look at the relationship between unemployment and economic stability, 
we are reminded that when prices get high enough, consumer demand for goods  The U.S. Business Environment       CHAPTER 1  23
Depression a prolonged and deep recession
Recession a period during which aggregate 
output, as measured by GDP, declinesUnemployment the level of joblessness 
among people actively seeking work in an 
economic systemConsumer Price Index (CPI) a measure of 
the prices of typical products purchased by 
consumers living in urban areasand  services goes down. We are also reminded that when demand for products 
goes down, producers cut back on hiring and, not surprisingly, eventually start 
producing less. Consequently, aggregate output decreases. When we go through 
a period during which aggregate output declines, we have a recession. During 
a recession , producers need fewer employees—less labor—to produce products. 
Unemployment, therefore, goes up.
To determine whether an economy is going through a recession, we start by 
 measuring aggregate output. Recall that this is the function of real GDP, which we 
find by making necessary adjustments to the total value of all goods and services 
produced within a given period by a national economy through domestic factors of 
production. A recession  is more precisely defined as a period during which  aggregate 
output, as measured by real GDP, declines. As noted earlier, most economists agree 
that the U.S. economy went into recession in 2008; most also predicted that we were 
gradually emerging from recession in early 2011. A prolonged and deep recession 
is a depression . The last major depression in the United States started in 1929 and 
lasted over 10 years. Most economists believe that the 2008–2010 recession, while the 
worst in decades, was not really a depression.
Managing the U.S. Economy
The government acts to manage the U.S. economic system through two sets of 
 policies: fiscal and monetary. It manages the collection and spending of its  revenues 
through fiscal policies . Tax rates, for example, can play an important role in fis -
cal  policies helping to manage the economy. One key element of President Barack 
Obama’s presidential platform was an overhaul of the U.S. tax system. Among other 
things, he proposed cutting taxes for the middle class while simultaneously raising 
taxes for both higher-income people and businesses.
Monetary policies  focus on controlling the size of the nation’s money supply. 
Working primarily through the Federal Reserve System (the nation’s central bank, 
often referred to simply as “the Fed”), the government can influence the ability 
and willingness of banks throughout the country to lend money.15 For example, to 
help offset the 2008–2009 recession, the government injected more money into the 
 economy through various stimulus packages. On the one hand, officials hoped that 
these funds would stimulate business growth and the creation of new jobs. On the 
other hand, though, some experts feared that increasing the money supply might 
also lead to inflation.
Taken together, fiscal policy and monetary policy make up stabilization policy —
government economic policy whose goal is to smooth out fluctuations in output and 
unemployment and to stabilize prices. In effect, the economic recession that started 
in 2008 was a significant departure from stabilization as business valuations dropped 
and jobs were eliminated. The various government interventions, such as financial 
bailouts, represented strategies to restore economic stability.
Fiscal Policies policies used by a  
government regarding how it collects and 
spends revenue
Monetary Policies policies used by  
a government to control the size of its  
money supplyStabilization Policy government economic 
policy intended to smooth out fluctuations 
in output and unemployment and to stabilize 
prices24 PART 1     THE ConTEM por Ary BUSI nESS WorLd
Continued from page 4
Hitting the Peak?
While surging oil and gas prices occupied the thoughts of consumers in 2011, govern -
ment officials began to worry about the bigger picture. The surging global demand for 
gasoline has been forcing experts to face a stark reality—the global supply of petroleum 
will soon peak and then slowly begin to decline. While no one can pinpoint when this 
will happen, virtually all the experts agree that it will happen well before the middle of 
this century.
So then what? The laws of supply and demand will continue to work, but in 
perhaps different ways. First, just because the supply of oil will decline doesn’t mean 
that it will disappear immediately. While there may be gradual reductions in supply, 
oil and gas will remain available for at least another century—but at prices that may 
make those of today seem like a bargain. New technology may also allow businesses 
to extract petroleum from locations that are not currently accessible, such as from the 
deepest areas under the oceans.
Second, and more significantly, there will be market incentives for businesses 
everywhere to figure out how to replace today’s dependence on oil and gas with 
alternatives. For instance, automobile manufacturers are already seeing increased 
demand for their hybrid products—cars and trucks that use a combination of gaso -
line and electrical power. Hence, firms that can produce alternative sources of energy 
will spring up, and those who find viable answers will prosper. And companies that 
can figure out how to replace today’s plastic products with new products that don’t 
rely on petroleum will also find willing buyers.
QUEST ionS for Di SCUSS ion
1 What were the basic factors of production in the petroleum industry? What do 
you think the factors of production might be in the future?
2 Explain how the concepts of the demand and supply of petroleum combine to 
determine market prices.
3 What are the economic indicators most directly affected by energy prices?
4 Does the global energy situation increase or decrease your confidence in a capi -
talistic system based on private enterprise?
5 Should there be more government intervention in the exploration for and pric -
ing of petroleum products? Why or why not?
Heather A. Craig/Shutterstock The U.S. Business Environment       CHAPTER 1  25
aggregate output (p. 17)
balance of trade (p. 20)
business (p. 4)
business cycle (p. 17)
capital (p. 7)
capitalism (p. 10)
communism (p. 10)
competition (p. 14)
consumer price index (CPI) (p. 22)
demand (p. 12)demand and supply schedule (p. 12)
demand curve (p. 12)
depression (p. 23)
domestic business environment (p. 6)
economic environment (p. 7)
economic indicators (p. 17)
economic system (p. 7)
entrepreneur (p. 8)
external environment (p. 5)
factors of production (p. 7)fiscal policies (p. 23)
global business environment (p. 6)
gross domestic product (GDP) (p. 17)
gross national product (GNP) (p. 18)
inflation (p. 21)
information resources (p. 9)
labor (human resources) (p. 7)
law of demand (p. 12)
law of supply (p. 12)
market (p. 10)KEy TErMS MyBizLab1.  Define the nature of U.S. business and identify its main 
goals and functions. (p. 4)
A business  is an organization that provides goods or services 
to earn profits. The prospect of earning profits —the  difference 
between a business’s revenues and expenses—encourages 
people to open and expand businesses. Businesses produce 
most of the goods and services that Americans consume 
and employ most working people. New forms of technol -
ogy,  service businesses, and international opportunities 
promise to keep production, consumption, and employment 
 growing indefinitely.
2.  Describe the external environments of  business and 
discuss how these  environments affect the success or 
failure of any organization. (pp. 5–7)
The external environment  of business refers to  everything 
outside its boundaries that might affect it. Both the  domestic  
and the global business environment  affect virtually all 
 businesses. The technological , political-legal , sociocultural , 
and economic environments  are also important.
3.  Describe the different types of global 
 economic   systems according to the means by  
which they control the factors of  production.  
(pp. 7–11)
Economic systems differ in the ways in which they 
 manage the five factors of production  (1) labor , or human 
resources , (2)  capital , (3) entrepreneurship , (4) physical 
resources , and (5)  information resources . A planned economy  
relies on a  centralized  government to control factors of 
production and make decisions. Under communism , the 
government owns and operates all sources of produc -
tion. In a market economy , individuals—producers and 
consumers—control production and allocation decisions 
through supply and demand. A market  is a mechanism for 
exchange between the buyers and sellers of a particular 
product or service. Sellers can charge what they want, and 
customers can buy what they choose. The political basis 
of market processes is capitalism , which fosters  private 
ownership of the factors of production and encourages 
entrepreneurship by offering profits as an incentive. Most 
countries rely on some form of mixed market economy —
a system featuring characteristics of both planned and 
 market economies.4.  Show how markets, demand, and supply affect 
 resource distribution in the United States, identify the 
elements of private  enterprise, and explain the various 
degrees of competition in the U.S. economic system. 
(pp. 11–16)
Decisions about what to buy and what to sell are determined 
by the forces of demand and supply. Demand  is the willing -
ness and ability of buyers to purchase a product or service. 
Supply  is the willingness and ability of producers to offer 
a product or service for sale. A demand and supply schedule  
reveals the relationships among different levels of demand 
and supply at different price levels.
Market economies reflect the operation of a private  enterprise 
system —a system that allows individuals to  pursue their 
own interests without government restriction. Private enter -
prise works according to four principles: (1)  private property 
rights, (2) freedom of choice, (3)  profits, and (4)   competition. 
Economists have identified four degrees of competition in a 
private enterprise system: (1) perfect  competition , (2) monopolis -
tic competition , (3) oligopoly , and (4)  monopoly .
5.  Explain the importance of the  economic  environment 
to business and  identify the  factors used to evaluate 
the  performance of an economic system.  
(pp. 16–23)
Economic indicators  are statistics that show whether 
an economic system is strengthening, weakening, or 
remaining stable. The overall health of the  economic 
environment—the economic system in which they 
operate—affects organizations. The two key goals 
of the U.S. system are economic growth  and economic 
 stability . Growth is assessed by aggregate output . 
Among the factors that can inhibit growth, two of the 
most important are balance of trade  and the national debt . 
Economic stability  means that the amount of money 
available in an economic system and the quantity of 
goods and services produced in it are growing at about 
the same rate. There are two key threats to stability: 
inflation  and unemployment . The government manages 
the economy through two sets of policies: fiscal policies  
(such as tax increases) and monetary policies  that focus 
on controlling the size of the nation’s money supply.
SUMM ary of lEarnin G oBjECTiVES MyBizLab26 PART 1     THE ConTEM por Ary BUSI nESS WorLd
QUESTIONS  FOR REvIEW
 1. What are the factors of production? Is one factor more 
important than the others? If so, which one? Why?
 2. What is a demand curve? A supply curve? What is the term 
for the point at which they intersect?
 3. What is GDP? Real GDP? What does each measure?
 4. Why is inflation both good and bad? How does the govern -
ment try to control it?
QUESTIONS  FOR ANALySIS
 5. In recent years, many countries that previously used planned 
economies have moved to market economies. Why do you 
think this has occurred? Can you envision a situation that 
would cause a resurgence of planned economies?
 6. Cite an instance in which a surplus of a product led to decreased 
prices. Cite an instance in which a shortage led to increased 
prices. What eventually happened in each case? Why?
 7. Explain how current economic indicators, such as inflation 
and unemployment, affect you personally. Explain how they 
may affect you as a manager. 8. At first glance, it might seem as though the goals of economic 
growth and stability are inconsistent with one another. How 
can you reconcile this apparent inconsistency?
APPLICATION  ExERCISES
 9. Visit a local shopping mall or shopping area. List each store 
that you see and determine what degree of competition it 
faces in its immediate environment. For example, if there is 
only one store in the mall that sells shoes, that store repre -
sents a monopoly. Note those businesses with direct com -
petitors (two jewelry stores) and show how they compete 
with one another.
 10. Interview a business owner or senior manager. Ask this 
individual to describe for you the following things: (1) how 
demand and supply affect the business, (2) what essential 
factors of production are most central to the firm’s opera -
tions, and (3) how fluctuations in economic indicators affect 
his or her business.
QUEST ionS anD Ex ErCiSES 
Paying the Price of Doing E-Business
Goal
To help you understand how the economic environment affects a 
product’s price.
Background Information
Assume that you own a local business that provides Internet access 
to individuals and businesses. Yours is one of four such businesses 
in the local market. Each one charges the same price: $12 per month 
for standard DSL service. You also provide e-mail service, as do two 
of your competitors. Two competitors give users free  personal web 
pages. One competitor just dropped its price to $10 per month, and 
the other two have announced that they’ll follow suit. Your break -
even price is $7 per customer—that is, you must charge $7 for your 
service package in order to cover your costs. You are concerned 
about getting into a price war that may destroy your business.Method
Step 1
Divide into groups of four or five people. Each group should 
develop a general strategy for responding to competitors’ price 
changes. Be sure to consider the following factors:
•	 How	demand	for	your	product	is	affected	by	price	changes
•	 The	number 	of	competitors 	selling	the	same	or	a	similar	
product
•	 The	methods 	you	can	use—other 	than	price—to 	attract	new	cus-
tomers and retain current customers
Step 2
Develop specific pricing strategies based on each of the following 
situations:
•	 A	month	after	dropping 	the	price	to	$10,	one	of	your	competitors 	
raises it back to $12.
BUilDinG yoUr BUSinESS SKillS market economy (p. 10)
market price (equilibrium price) (p. 12)
mixed market economy (p. 10)
monetary policies (p. 23)
monopolistic competition (p. 15)
monopoly (p. 16)
national debt (p. 21)
natural monopoly (p. 16)
nominal GDP (p. 18)
oligopoly (p. 15)
perfect competition (p. 14)physical resources (p. 8)
planned economy (p. 9)
political-legal environment (p. 6)
private enterprise (p. 14)
privatization (p. 10)
productivity (p. 19)
profits (p. 4)
purchasing power parity (p. 18)
real GDP (p. 18)
recession (p. 23)
shortage (p. 12)socialism (p. 11)
sociocultural environment (p. 7)
stability (p. 21)
stabilization policy (p. 23)
standard of living (p. 17)
supply (p. 12)
supply curve (p. 12)
surplus (p. 12)
technological  
environment (p. 6)
unemployment (p. 22) The U.S. Business Environment       CHAPTER 1  27
Prescribing a Dose of Competitive Medicine
The Situation
You are a businessperson in a small town, where you run one of 
two local pharmacies. The population and economic base are fairly 
stable. Each pharmacy controls about 50 percent of the market. 
Each is reasonably profitable, generating solid if unspectacular 
revenues.
The Dilemma
You have just been approached by the owner of the other phar -
macy. He has indicated an interest either in  buying your pharmacy 
or in selling his to you. He argues that neither of you can sub -
stantially increase your profits and complains that if one pharmacy raises its prices,  customers will simply go to the other one. He 
tells you outright that if you sell to him, he plans to raise prices by 
10  percent. He believes that the local market will have to accept 
the increase for two reasons: (1) The town is too small to attract 
national competitors, such as Walgreens or CVS, and (2) local cus -
tomers can’t go elsewhere to shop because the nearest town with 
a pharmacy is 40 miles away.
QUESTIONS  TO ADDRESS
 1 What are the roles of supply and demand in this  
scenario?
 2 What are the underlying ethical issues?
 3 What would you do if you were actually faced with this 
 situation?
ExErCiSinG yoUr ETHiCS: inDiViDUal Ex ErCiSE 
Making the Right Decision
The Situation
Hotel S is a large hotel in the heart of a southern city. The hotel 
is a franchise operation run by an international hotel chain. The 
primary source of revenue for the hotel is convention business. A 
major tropical storm is about to hit the city, which in the past has 
been prone to heavy flooding.
The Dilemma
Because Hotel S is a licensed operation, it must maintain numerous 
quality standards in order to keep its license. This license is impor -
tant because the international management company handles 
advertising, reservations, and so on. If it were to lose its license, it is 
almost certain that the hotel would have to reduce its staff.
For the past few years, members of the Hotel S team have been 
lobbying the investors who own the hotel to undertake a major 
renovation. They fear that without such a renovation, the hotel will 
lose its license when it comes up for renewal in a few months. The 
owners, however, have balked at investing more of their funds in 
the hotel itself but have indicated that hotel management can use 
revenues earned above a specified level for upgrades.
The tropical storm approaching the city has cut off most 
major transportation avenues, and telephone service is also down. 
The Hotel S staff is unable to reach the general manager, who has been traveling on business. Because the city is full of convention -
eers, hotel rooms are in high demand. Unfortunately, because of 
the disrepair at the hotel, it only has about 50 percent occupancy. 
Hotel S staff have been discussing what to do and have identified 
three basic options:
 1 The hotel can reduce room rates in order to help both local 
citizens as well as out-of-town visitors. The hotel can also 
provide meals at reduced rates. A few other hotels are also 
doing this.
 2 The hotel can maintain its present pricing policies. Most of 
the city’s hotels are adopting this course of action.
 3 The hotel can raise its rates by approximately 15 percent with -
out attracting too much attention. It can also start charging 
for certain things it has been providing for free, such as local 
 telephone calls, parking, and morning coffee. None of the staff 
members favors this option out of greed, but instead see it as a 
way to generate extra profits for renovation and to protect jobs.
Team Activity
Assemble a group of four students and assign each group member 
to one of the following roles:
•	 A	member 	of	the	hotel	staff
•	 The	Hotel	S	manager
•	 A	customer 	at	the	hotel
•	 A	Hotel	S	investor
ExErCiSinG yoUr ETHiCS: TEaM ExErCiSE•	 Two	of	your	competitors 	drop	their	prices	even	further—to 	$8	a	
month. As a result, your business falls off by 25 percent.
•	 One	of	the	competitors 	who	offers	free	web	pages	announces that 	
the service will become optional for an extra $2 a month.
•	 Two	competitors 	announce 	that	they	will	charge	individ -
ual	users	$8	a	month	but	will	charge	a	higher	price	(not	yet	
announced) for businesses.
•	 All	four	providers 	(including 	you)	are	charging 	$8	a	month.	One	
goes out of business, and you know that another is in poor finan -
cial health.FOLLOW -UP QUESTIONS
 1. Discuss the role that various inducements other than  
price might play in affecting demand and supply in this 
market.
 2. Is it always in a company’s best interest to feature the lowest 
prices?
 3. Eventually, what form of competition is likely to characterize 
this market?28 PART 1     THE ConTEM por Ary BUSI nESS WorLd
Bancfirst
Learning Objectives
The purpose of this video is to help you:
 1 Describe the impact of the external environment on a 
business.
 2 Identify factors that influence demand and supply curves 
and the equilibrium price.
 3 Understand the impact of the business cycle.
Synopsis
BancFirst is a multi-branch bank located in Oklahoma. While many 
banks faced serious crises during the past few years, BancFirst has 
remained strong. A relaxed regulatory environment allowed banks 
to make mortgage loans to buyers who were unlikely to be able 
to repay the loans. When these buyers began to default on their 
loans, banks foreclosed on the loans and became the owners of 
these homes. In the past, banks were typically able to resell fore -
closed homes and recover the amount of the loan. However, with 
a large number of homes for sale and a shrinking pool of buyers, 
banks found themselves unable to sell the foreclosed homes and 
began to face serious challenges. While the number of bank fail -
ures was less than ten for most of the last decade, rates began to 
skyrocket in 2009. BancFirst avoided much of this crisis by sticking 
to well-established lending guidelines.DISCUSSION  QUESTIONS
 1 What are the major elements of the external environment? 
Of these, which is most important to BancFirst?
 2 What are the factors that caused the demand curve for 
houses to shift to the right? How did this affect the equilib -
rium price?
 3 Which factors created a shift in the supply curve? How did 
this affect the equilibrium price for houses?
 4 There are four stages in the business cycle: prosperity, reces -
sion, depression, and recovery. Where was the U.S. economy 
when the housing crisis began? Where are we today?
 5 The U.S. government “bailed out” a number of banks   
during this crisis. Do you think that this prevented a 
depression? Do you think that this is the proper role of 
government?
Online Exploration
Visit the BancFirst website (www.bancfirst.com) and click on 
Investor Relations. From this page, you will be able to access the 
bank’s latest annual report (Latest 10-K). Although the report 
is very long, you can read through the first few pages to learn 
more about the bank. Beginning on page 13, BancFirst identi -
fies a number of risk factors. What are the primary concerns that 
BancFirst has identified? What plans have they made to address 
each concern?
ViDEo Ex ErCiSE MyBizLabACTION  STEPS
 1 Before hearing any of your group’s comments on this situa -
tion, and from the perspective of your assigned role, which 
of the three options do you think is the best choice? Write 
down the reasons for your position.
 2 Before hearing any of your group’s comments on this situ -
ation, and from the perspective of your assigned role, what 
are the underlying ethical issues, if any, in this situation? 
Write down the issues.
 3 Gather your group together and reveal, in turn, each 
 member’s comments on the best choice of the three options. Next, reveal the ethical issues listed by each 
member.
 4 Appoint someone to record main points of agreement and 
disagreement within the group. How do you explain the 
results? What accounts for any disagreement?
 5 From an ethical standpoint, what does your group conclude 
is the most appropriate action that should have been taken 
by the hotel in this situation?
 6 Develop a group response to the following question: Can 
your team identify other solutions that might help satisfy 
both extreme views?
1 “If Unrest Spreads, Gas May Hit $5,” USA Today , February 
22, 2011, p. 1A; “Why the World Is One Storm Away from 
Energy Crisis,” Wall Street Journal , September 24, 2005, 
A1, A2; “Higher and Higher—Again: Gasoline Prices Set a 
Record,” USA Today , May 25, 2004, p. B1; “Who Wins and 
Loses When Gas Prices Skyrocket?” Time,	May	8,	2006,	
p.	28;	“Gas	Prices	Climbing 	Despite	Hefty	Supply,” 	USA 
Today , February 2, 2011, pp. B1, B2; “Fear and Loathing in 
the Oil Markets,” Time , March 14, 2011, p. 22.
2 See Paul Heyne, Peter J. Boetke, and David L. Prychitko, The 
Economic Way of Thinking , 11th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice 	Hall,	2005),	171–176.
3 Hoover’s Handbook of American Business  2011 (Austin: Hoover’s, 
2011), pp. 793–794.4 Michael Porter and Mark Kramer, “Creating Shared  
Value,” Harvard Business Review , January–February 2011, 
pp.	62–77.
5 See Karl E. Case and Ray C. Fair, Principles of Economics , 10th 
ed., updated (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2011), 
103–105.
6 http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/00000.html (February 15, 
2010).
7 Case and Fair, Principles of Economics , 432–433.
8 The World Factbook: United States. (February 15, 2011), at 
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
factbook/geos/us.html
9 Ibid.
EnD noTES10 See Olivier Blanchard, Macroeconomics , 4th ed. (Upper Saddle 
River,	NJ:	Prentice 	Hall,	2005),	24–26.
11 See Jay Heizer and Barry Render, Operations Management ,	8th	
ed.	(Upper	Saddle	River,	NJ:	Prentice 	Hall,	2006),	14.
12 This section is based on Paul Heyne, Peter J. Boetke, and David 
L. Prychitko, The Economic Way of Thinking , 11th ed. (Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2005), 491–493.13 This section follows Ronald M. Ayers and Robert A. Collinge, 
Economics: Explore and Apply , (Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice 	Hall,	2004),	163–167.
14 See Heyne, Boetke, and Prychitko, The Economic Way of 
Thinking , 403–409, 503–504.
15 See “The New Fed,” BusinessWeek , November 7, 2005, 
pp. 30–34. The U.S. Business Environment       CHAPTER 1  29